---
layout: "post"
title:  "Phantom in the Kitchen"
date:   2018-11-04
custom_type: "Creative"
---

*On Hallows' eve, from the ground and the heavens, come spirits that have expired 
and are yet to arrive. Time unwinds itself from the clutches of reality, and for 
one night, words like "yesterday", "tomorrow", "possibly", and "never" bear no 
meaning whatsoever. Eternity exists all at once. All around us, the planets, 
stars and galaxies shudder in a cacophony of possibilities: birth, life, and 
death all co-exist as the gigantic and marvellous defy all the laws of physics. 
Unfortunately, our conscious and subconscious minds are programmed to dismiss 
these anomalies, letting them succumb into oblivion. Rationality always comes in 
the way of imagination...*

Zoom in to the Milky Way, Earth, Canada, Ontario, Toronto, the very intersection 
of Bay and Elm; dash past the security desk of the PGCRL, and fly up to the 21st 
floor, where silence reigns as the living can never properly know. It is October 
31st and nearing midnight, which further makes the silence unbearable. In the 
stillness, you find the kitchen, illuminated, with a clean sink and two fridges 
on opposite sides. The kettle would most probably have been on during the 
daytime, and at least two PGCRL residents would have been engaged in a most 
vivid discussion about their gels, raw data, or computer simulations. Well now, 
the silence was frictionless. The air itself seemed to be frozen such that if 
you dared to breathe, your lungs would have given way to the crystals in the air 
and you would have drowned in snow. It is the quiet characterizing the shadow 
which moves behind the curtains, the hush accompanying late night visits to the 
kitchen when your hair incoherently stands on end...an ominous silence, deafening 
to the point of driving anyone out of their mind. And if you tilted your head 
just there and dared to look at that thing in the corner of your eye...

An insubstantial, almost ethereal, figure detached itself from next to the first 
aid kit, although calling it a figure is perhaps a stretch. "It" was a 
discontinuity, a singularity in the fabric of space and time. It was wearing a 
lab coat and a pair of goggles...but not quite. It seemed to exist while not quite 
existing. It was extinct and extant at the same time, and was such a 
contradiction in and out of itself that one's brain desperately wanted to filter 
it out. It also wore a colourful ribbon around its neck supporting a badge 
displaying the seemingly stretched face of the person named "Garnet Evergreen".

"Garnet" appeared to be engrossed in the steaming contents of a grey cup. Was it 
coffee, tea or hot water? Who could tell? And suddenly, in a movement defying 
all the laws of nature, in a swift gesture that somehow left its traces in space 
like a slowed-down motion picture, she levitated the cup to her mouth and 
gulped...For an instant, cubes of ten, then twenty, then a hundred dimensions 
became obvious. Here was electricity in the air. And, boom! The atoms around the 
singularity were forced together into a block that ended up forming Garnet 
Evergreen. Or at least a tangible copy of her. She wore a crown of wild brown 
hair, had fingers that shook with the unmistakable tremor of the helpless 
insomniac, and eyes that were lined with exhaustion.

As things came into focus, the refrigerators decided that they had had a long 
enough break and resumed their humming chorus. To an onlooker, it would have 
been increasingly obvious that Garnet carried a lab notebook in her right hand, 
a lab notebook the likes of which are rarely seen. Its cover must have been 
white with a blue border at some point, but had through inexplicable means 
acquired not only a parchment-like look but also exchanged its sharp corners for 
a chewed appearance. In any case, it looked like such a preference was a taste 
that someone acquired, for Garnet did not seem to wish to part with her lab 
notebook. On the contrary, she appeared to be engaged in a lengthy discussion 
with herself over what seemed to be a complicated table on the last page of her 
notebook. Upon closer inspection, this table seemed to have had its existence 
faded multiple times through the paper's absorption of a brown liquid, quite 
likely the very same that Garnet had just been drinking. The numbers on the 
table made no sense to the minds of mere mortals especially due to the paucity 
of labels--but Garnet, being anything but a mere mortal, would not have any 
trouble with that now, would she? The secret to the encryption of the table 
belonged to Garnet alone, and its completion rested on the not-at-all-blurry 
shoulders of the...student.

And so, Garnet thought. Somewhere in the Land of the Living, a clock carried on 
ticking the seconds, the minutes, then the hours away. Garnet did not move from 
her spot. For her, there was something reassuring about the kitchen area. In a 
house, a kitchen typically whispers of life, what with its humming refrigerator, 
dirty dishes sitting in the sink, dripping tap...so did the kitchen on the 21st 
floor for her. Perhaps it reminded her of the discussions she would have had 
with herself and others in another lifetime. It was close to 4am before her 
thoughts distilled and Garnet started to write in her lab notebook. They were 
careful notes, about things that only Garnet knew. Which was just as well 
because her existence, at least for that day, was getting close to its end.

One could say that she was fading, perhaps as the brown bitter liquid she had 
consumed started to disappear from existence...

Morning dawned eventually. Gradually, life--as we know it--entered the PGCRL. The 
atmosphere in the building was now nowhere close to what it had been in the dead 
of the night. The roads outside were populous, with cars driving past, 
pedestrians walking along the sidewalk. Life within the PGCRL itself was one to 
behold: residents moved into the building like ants towards an overlooked leaf 
in the rainforest. The leaf was to be science, knowledge and discoveries waiting 
to be made. One of the ants was Garnet Evergreen--of the Land of the Living. 
Garnet left the elevator on the 21st floor, making her way to the kitchen. When 
she entered the kitchen, she was perplexed to find her lab notebook open on the 
last page, revealing a calculation she had been struggling with. Except that 
someone had scribbled out a minus sign, and explained that...Wait, oh...that...
That did it! "Gosh, this solves everything! All hail Gauss, Darwin and...Newton? 
Eureka! I did it!" As Garnet burst into laughter, she raised her arms outwards 
as an athlete would have when arriving first at the finish line. Hanging by the 
gigantic panes overlooking Lake Ontario, something singular grinned like the 
Cheshire cat for the briefest moment. And then poof! It was well and truly gone.

*Originally published in the October 2015 issue of the SickKids Training Post*